 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DRAFT MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 

(THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013) 

(COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES) 

M E M O R A N D U M  OF  A S S O C I A T I O N 

OF 

COFORGE LIMITED 

1st The Name of the Company is COFORGE Limited. 

2nd The Registered Office of the Company will be situated in the National Capital Territory of 

Delhi. 

3rd The objects for which the Company is established are :- 

A.  THE OBJECTS TO BE PURSUED BY THE COMPANY ON ITS INCORPORATION ARE: 

1. 

To  render  Consultancy  and  related  services  in  Financial,  Marketing,  Export,  Imports 

Technical, Scientific Software, Hardware and related disciplines. 

2. 

To carry  on the  business  of providing  and supply  of end-to-end Information  Technology 

Solutions, including turnkey solutions, including systems integration of software, computers, 

peripherals, networking and communication components, cabling, power supply equipment, 

appropriate fixtures, metering and monitoring devices, conventional and broad-band wireless, 

wireline and optical communications equipment and to undertake all other related activities. 

3. 

To carry on the business of providing all kinds of information technology based and enabled 

services in India and abroad, electronic remote processing, e-services, including all types 

of  internet  based/web  enabled  services,  transaction  processing,  fulfillment  services, 

business support services including but not limited to providing financial and related services 

of  all  kinds  and  description  including  billing  services,  processing  services,  data  base 

services, data entry business, marketing services, business information  and management 

services,  training  and  consultancy  services  to business,  organizations,  concerns,  firms, 

corporations, local bodies, trusts, states, governments and other entities; to establish and 

operate service processing centers for providing services for back office and processing 

requirements, contacting and communicating to and on behalf of overseas customers by 

voice, data image, letters using dedicated international private lines; and to handle  Business 

process  management,  remote  help  desk  management,  remote  management;  remote 

customer interaction, customer relationship management  and customer servicing through 

call centers, email based activities and letter/facsimile based communication, knowledge 

storage and management, data management, warehousing, search, integration and analysis 

for financial and non-financial data. 

4. 

To  act  as  information  technology  consultants  and  to  operate  a  high  technology  data 

processing  center  for  providing  information  processing,  analysis,  development, 

 

T

I
I

N
-
e
M

 

 

5. 

6. 

7. 

2 

accounting and business information and to customers in India and abroad; to carry on the 
business  of  gathering,  collating,  compiling,  processing,  analyzing,  distributing,  selling, 
publishing data and information and services and providing access to information regarding 
financial operations and management financial services, investment services, business and 
commercial  operations,  financial  status,  credit  worthiness  and  rating  consumer  responses 
and management of business of all kinds and descriptions. 

To  carry  on  the  business  of  e-learning  services  including  but  not  limited  to  content 
development and support, animation, learning support, learning management systems support 
and knowledge services; to carry on the business of data digitization by digitizing physical 
and  manual  records  such  as  text  images,  videos  and  audio  to  carry  on  the  business  in 
India and abroad, geographic information systems by digitization and processing of spatial 
data to carry on the business of medical transcription over different channels for servicing 
the health sector. 

To carry on the business as internet service provider  and undertake any and all kinds of 
internet/web based activities and transactions; to design, develop, sell, provide, maintain, 
market, buy, import, export, sell and license computer software, hardware, computer systems 
an programs products, services and to give out computer machine time and to carry on the 
business of collecting, collating, storing, devising other systems including software programs 
and systems. 

To setup, develop, manage  and operate Special Economic Zones, Software  Technology 
Parks  or  other  Export  Promotion  Parks  for  IT/  ITes  entities  for  itself  and  others,  and  to 
undertake allied activities in connection thereof including leasing/letting out the same. 

B.  MATTERS  WHICH  ARE  NECESSARY  FOR  FURTHERANCE  OF  THE    OF THE MAIN 

OBJECTS ARE: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

To appoint agents, sub agents, commission agents, dealers, distributors, indenting  house, 
representatives, and in relating to the attainment of main objects of the company in India 
and abroad. 

To acquire, hold, exchange, buy, sell, underwrite shares, stocks, debentures, stocks, bonds, 
obligations or securities issue or guaranteed by any person, Government, or Public Body 
and  to  acquire  any  of the  aforesaid  in any  manner  and  to subscribe  for  the  same  either 
conditionally or otherwise and to guarantee the subscription thereof, and to exercise and 
enforce all rights and powers, conferred by or incidental to the ownership thereof in connection 
with the business of the company. 

To invest money of the Company, not immediately required, in shares, stocks, investments 
(other  than  shares  or  stocks  in  the  company)  as  may  be  expedient  and  to  hold,  sell  or 
otherwise  deal  with  such  investments  in  any  manner  conductive  to  the  interest  of  the 
Company. 

To do  all  or  any  of  the  other  things  either  as  principals,  agents,  trustees,  contractors  or 
otherwise and either alone or in conjunction with others and either by or through agents, 
subcontractors, trustees or otherwise. 

To share  with  any  company,  firm,  individual  or any  other  organization,  premises,  works, 
services, personnels and other services and facilities and compensate or accept or give 

 

 

3 

compensation at periodical intervals for such arrangements and do all such other things as 
may be deemed incidental or conductive to the attainment and promotion of the main objects 
of the company. 

* Clause added vide resolution passed through Postal Ballot on March 05, 2009. 

6. 

To grant pensions or annuities to any person or persons who are or have at any time been 
Director or Directors of, employed, in the service of the Company or of its predecessors in 
business, or the relations, connection or dependents of any such person or persons and to 
establish  or  support  associations,  institutions,  clubs,  funds  and  trusts  which  may  be 
considered, calculated to benefit any such person or persons or otherwise to advance the 
interest of the Company, its members or its employees and to contribute to any scheme for 
the purchase by trustees, of shares in the Company to be held for the benefit of the Company's 
employees, and to lend money of the Company to its employees to enable them to purchase 
shares of the company, and scheme for sharing profits of the Company with its employees 
or any of them. 

7.  To  purchase,  alter,  acquire,  maintain,  enlarge,  replace,  take  on  lease  or  tenancy  or  in 
exchange, hire lease, sale lease take options over or otherwise acquire any estate or interest 
whatsoever and to hold, develop, work, cultivate, deal with and turn to account concessions 
grants, decrees,  licenses,  privileges, claims, option,  lease,  property, real  or personal for 
any  business  of the Company  and  to  purchase,  charter,  hire,  build  or otherwise  acquire 
vehicles of any sort or description for use of the business of the  Company. 

8. 

9. 

To sell, exchange, mortgage, let on lease, royalty or distribute, grant licenses, easements; 
options and other rights over and in any other manner deal with or dispose off the whole or 
any part of the undertaking, property, rights, assets  and effects of the Company for such 
considerations whether for shares, stocks or otherwise as may be thought fit. 

To pay for any rights or properties acquired by the Company and remunerate any person or 
company rendering services to the Company either by payment or by allotment, to him or 
them of shares or securities of the Company as paid up in full or in part or otherwise and to 
remunerate,  reimburse  the  expenses  for  formation  of  the  Company  and  the  preliminary 
expenses connected therewith. 

10.  To insure with any other company or persons against losses, damages and risks of all kind 
which may effect the Company provided that nothing herein contained shall empower  the 
Company  to  carry  on  the  business  of  assurances,  accident  assurance,  fire  assurance, 
employees  liability  assurance,  industrial  assurance,  or any  business  of insurance,  or re- 
insurer within the meaning of the Insurance Act, 1938 or any Act amending, extending or 
reenacting the same. 

11.  To lend or advance money, either with or without security, and give credit to such persons 
(including Government) and upon such terms and conditions as the Company may determent 
fit for implementing the main objects, provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed 
to  empower  the  Company  to  carry  on  in  the  business  of  banking  as  defined  under  the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 

12.  To open branches, offices, showrooms, departmental stores, depots, godowns, warehouses, 

 

 

4 

workshops, exhibit units at one or more places and procure the registration or recognition of 
the Company in or under the Laws of any place outside India. 

13.  To receive money  on  deposits  or loans and borrow or raise money in such manner as the 
Company shall determine fit, and particularly by the issue of debentures or debenture stocks 
(perpetual  or  otherwise)  and  to  secure the repayment of any money  borrowed, raised or 
owing by mortgage, charge or lien upon all or any of the properties or assets of the Company 
(both present and future) including its un-called capital and also by a similar charge, mortgage, 
or lien to secure and guarantee the performance  by the Company or any  other  person  or 
company of the obligations undertaken by the Company or any other persons or company 
as the case may be. 

14.  To guarantee the performance of any contract or obligations and the payment of money or 
dividends and interest on any stocks, shares, or securities in any company or persons or 
the subscriptions of such shares, stocks, or securities in any case in which such guarantee 
may be considered likely, directly or indirectly, to further the objects of the  Company. 

15.  To draw, make, accept, endorse, discount, negotiate, execute and to issue bills of exchange, 
promissory notes, bills of lading, warrants, debentures and other negotiable or transferable 
instruments or securities and to undertake financial and commercial obligations, transactions 
and operations of all kind. 

16.  To apply for purchase or otherwise acquire and prolong and renew, develop or improve, in 
any  part  of  the  world,  any  patent  rights,  trade  marks,  designs,  copy  rights,  licenses, 
protections, concessions  and the like conferrings, any exclusive, nonexclusive  or limited 
rights  their  use  or use  of any  secret  or other  information  as to any  invention,  process  or 
privilege which may seem capable for any of the purposes of the Company or the acquisition 
of  which  may  seem  to  benefit  the  Company,  calculated  directly  or  indirectly  and  to  use, 
exercise,  develop  or  grant  licenses  or  privileges  in  respect  thereof  or  otherwise  turn  to 
account the property, rights and information so acquired. 

17.  To acquire and undertake all or any part of the businesses, properties and liabilities of any 
person or company carrying on or proposing to carry on any business which this company 
is  authorised  to  carry  on  or  is  possessed  of  property  suitable  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Company. 

18.  To form, incorporate or promote any company or companies whether in India or elsewhere 
having amongst its or their objects the acquisition of all or any of the assets or development 
of the Company or any other object or objects which in the opinion of the Company could or 
might directly  or indirectly  assist  the Company  in the management  of its business or the 
developments of its properties or otherwise prove advantageous to the Company to pay all 
or any of the costs otherwise prove advantageous to the Company and to pay all or any of 
the costs and expenses incurred in connection with  any such promotion  or incorporation 
and  to  remunerate  any  person  or  company  in  any  manner  it  shall  think  fit  for  services 
rendered or to be rendered in obtaining subscription to bonds, debentures, obligations or 
securities of any other company held or owned by the Company or in which the Company 
may have an interest or in or about the formation or promotion of the Company held or 

 

 

5 

owned by the Company or in which the Company may have an interest or in or about the 
formation of promotion of the company or conduct of its business or in or about the promotion 
or formation  of any  other  company  in which  the  company  may  have  interest  by  virtue  of 
technical, financial or other collaboration and/or joint ventures. 

19.  To amalgamate or to enter into partnership or into any arrangements for sharing profits, union 
of interest, co-operation, joint venture or reciprocal concessions with any person or persons, 
company or companies, (carrying  on or engaged  in or about to carry  on or engage  in or) 
being authorised to carry on or engage in any business or transactions which the Company 
is authorised to carry on. 

20.  To enter into any arrangements and take all necessary or proper steps with any persons, 
Governments or with other authorities Supreme, National, Local, Municipal or otherwise at 
any place in which the Company may have interest and to carry on negotiations or operations 
for the purpose of directly or indirectly carrying out the objects of the Company or effecting 
any modifications to the constitution of the Company for furthering the interest of its Member 
and  to  oppose  any  such  steps  taken  by  any  other  company  or  person  which  may  be 
considered  likely,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  prejudice  the  interest  of  the  Company  and  to 
assist the promotion, whether directly or indirectly, of any legislation which may appear to 
be in the interest of the Company and to oppose and resist, whether directly or indirectly, 
any legislation which may seem disadvantageous to the Company to obtain from any such 
Government,  authority,  or  company,  any  charters,  contracts,  decrees,  rights,  loans, 
privileges, or concessions which the Company may think desirable to obtain and carry out, 
exercise and comply with such arrangements, charters, contracts, decrees, rights, privileges 
or concessions. 

21.  To  adopt  such  means  of  making  known  the  products,  services  and  the  activities  of  the 
Company as may seem expedient and in particular by advertising in the press, circulars, 
publications or by information or granting prizes, awards and donations. 

22.  To undertake and/or execute any trust, the undertaking of which may seem to the Company 
desirable either gratituously or otherwise and to vest any real or personal property, rights 
interest acquired for the benefit of the Company with declared trust in favour of the Company. 

23.  To apply the assets of the Company in any way or towards the establishment maintenance 
or extension of any Association, Institution or Fund in any way connected with any particular 
trade or business or commerce generally and particularly with any particular trade or business 
or commerce including an Association, Institution or Fund for the protection of the interest 
of the masters, owners and employers against losses by bad debts, strikes, combinations, 
fire, accidents or otherwise or for the benefits of any clerks, workmen at any time employed 
by the Company or any of its predecessors in business or their families or dependents and 
whether  or  not  in  common  with  the  persons  or  classes  of  persons  and  in  particular  of 
friendly  cooperative  and  other  Societies,  Reading  Rooms,  Libraries,  Educational  and 
Charitable  Institutions,  Refectories,  Dinning  And  Recreation  Rooms,  Creches,  Chaples, 
Clubs, Schools and Hospitals and to grant gratuities, pension and allowances and to contribute 
to any funds raised by public or local subscription for any purpose. 

24.  To subscribe or grant money for any national, charitable, benevolent,  public, general or 

 

 

6 

useful activities or for any exhibitions, rural development, energy conservation upliftment of 
poor aged background class and for health care and family welfare. 

25.  To  develop,  promote,  establish  education  institutions,  training  centres  and  employment 

agencies, in and outside India. 

26.  To  buy  and  sell,  import,  export,  acquire  on  royalty,  lease  or  license  patents  secrets, 
trademarks; designs, knowhow, expertise in India or elsewhere to carry out the main objects 
of the Company. 

27.  To act as or engage, consultants, advisors, experts, technicians, resear chers, counselors 

and attorneys in relation to the main object of the Company. 

28.  To import, export  buy, sell or otherwise deal in plant and machinery, instruments, equipments 

technology and requisites related with the main objects of the Company. 

29.  To buy, sell,  export,  import  and  arrange  any such  products, services  and materials,  and 
provide facilities by making arrangement which may be necessary for the purposes of main 
objects of the company. 

30.  To own, arrange and provide any of the services as are considered necessary in the hotel 

trade in or outside India. 

4th The liability of the members is  limited and this liability is limited to the amount unpaid, if any, on 
the shares held by them. 

 

5th The Authorized Share Capital of the Company is Rs. 77,00,00,000 (Rupees Seventy  Seven 
Crores  only)  divided  into  7,70,00,000  (Seven  Crore  Seventy  Lacs)  Equity  Shares  of  Rs.  10/- 
(Rupees Ten) each. 

 

7 

6th We the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed below, are desirous of 
being  formed  into  a  Company  in  pursuance  of  this  Memorandum  of  Association  and  we 
respectively agree to take the numbers of shares in the Capital of the Company set opposite to 
respective names :- 

 

 

Sl. 
No. 

Name, Address, Description and 
Occupation of each Subscriber 

Number of Share 

taken by each 

Subscriber 

Signature of 
Subscribers 

Signature, Name, descrip- 
tion and occupation of the 

witness 

1.  SHIV NADAR 

S/o Late Sh. S.S. Nadar, 
44, Friends Colony, 
New Delhi-110 065 
(Business) 

10 Equity 
Shares 

Sd/- 

2.  RAJENDRA SINGH PAWAR 

S/o Col. Kanwal Singh 
M-190, Greater Kailash-II 
New Delhi-110 048 
(Business) 

10 Equity 
Shares 

Sd/- 

 

 

3.  VIJAY KUMAR THADANI 
S/o Late Sh. H.B. Thadani 
S-223, Greater Kailash, 
New Delhi-110 048 
(Service) 

10 Equity 
Shares 

Sd/- 

 

 

TOTAL 

 

30 Equity 
Shares 

Verified at New Delhi on 28th day of April, 1992 

 
s
r
e
b
i
r
c
s
b
u
s
 
e
h
t
 
l
l

a
 
f
o
 
s
e
r
u
t
a
n
g
s
 
e
h
t
 
s
s
e
n
t
i

i

w

 
I

l

 
.
i
h
e
D
w
e
N

 

 
t
a
 
e
c
n
e
s
e
r
p
 
y
m
 
n
i
 
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
b
u
s
 
e
v
a
h
 
o
h
w

 
-
/
d
S

 
)

D
O
O
S

 
.

K
A

.

(

 
d
o
o
S

 
.

.

P
V

 
.
h
S
 
e
t
a
L
 
o
/
S

i

 
I
I
-
n
o
s
n
e
t
x
E
 
h
t
u
o
S

 
,
8
4
-
P

 
9
4
0
 
0
1
1
-
i
h
e
D
w
e
N

 

l

 
2
7
3
4
1
 
.
o
N

 
.

M

 
)
t
n
a
t
n
u
o
c
c
A
 
d
e
r
e
t
r
a
h
C

(

 

 

(THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013)  

(COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES) 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF 

COFORGE LIMITED 
CONSTITUTIONS OF THE COMPANY 

1. 

a)  Save as reproduced herein, the regulations contained in Table 'F' in the First Schedule 

to the Companies Act, 2013 shall not apply to the Company. 

b)      Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  Articles,  such  provisions  and  regulations   

as may be prescribed by the legislature, as compulsory, by later enactments relating to 
Companies, shall have priority of observance under such circumstances. 

INTERPRETATION CLAUSE 

2.  The marginal notes hereto shall not affect the construction hereof, in these presents, unless 
there is  something  in the  subject  or  context  inconsistent  therewith, Words  and  expressions 
contained in these regulations  shall  bear  the  same  meaning  as  in the  Act,  or  any  statutory 
modification thereof. 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

'The  Act'  means  the Companies  Act,  2013  and  includes  any  reenactment  or  statutory 
modification thereof for time being. 

'The  Board'  or  'The  Board  of  Directors'  means  a  meeting  of  Directors  duly  called  and 
constituted or as the case may be  the  Directors assembled at a Board Meeting  or the 
requisite number of Directors entitled to pass a circular or resolution in accordance with 
these Articles. 

'The Company' or 'This Company' means COFORGE Limited. 

'Directors' means the Directors for the time being of the Company or as the case may 
be, the Directors assembled at a Board Meeting. 

e) 

‘Dividend’ includes interim Dividend.  

f) 

g) 

'Member' shall mean Members of the Company holding a share or shares of any class 
registered in the Share Register of the Company. 

'Month'  shall  mean  a  period  of  thirty  days  and  a  “Calendar  month”  means  an  English 
Calendar Month. 

h) 

' Office' means the Registered Office of the Company. 

i) 

j) 

k) 

‘Officer who is in default’ for the purpose of any provision in this Act shall have the same 
meaning as specified under section 2 (60) of the Act. 

‘Ordinary Resolution’ and ‘Special Resolution’ shall have the same meaning as specified 
under section 114 of the Act. 

'Paid up' or ‘share capital paid-up’ means such aggregate amount of money credited as 
paid-up  as  is  equivalent  to the  amount received  as  paid up  in respect  of shares  issued 
and also includes any amount credited as paid-up in respect of shares of the company, 
but does not include any other amount received in respect of such shares, by whatever 
name called. 

l) 

‘Person’ includes an individual, an association of persons or body of individual,  whether 
incorporated or not and a firm. 

m) 

'Proxy' includes attorney duly constituted under a Power of Attorney. 

n) 

'These Presents' or 'Regulations' means these Articles of Association originally framed 
or  altered  from  time  to  time  and  in  force  for  the  time  being  and  include  the 
Memorandum of Association where the context so requires. 

o) 

'The Seal' means the Common Seal for the time being of the Company. 

p) 

q) 

r) 

s) 

t) 

'Special  Resolutions'  shall  have  the  meaning  assigned  thereto  by  Section  189  of  the 
Act. 'Words' importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender and vice 
versa.  Words  importing  the  singular  shall  include  the  plural  and  words  importing  the 
plural shall include the singular. 

‘SEBI’ means The Securities and Exchange Board of India established under Section 3 
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. 

'Section' means Section of the Act, 2013 or any amendments thereof. 

‘Security’  means  the  securities  as  defined  in  clause  (h)  of  section  2  of  the  Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. 

'Year' means the calendar year and ‘Financial Year’  in relation to the Company means 
the period starting from 1st day of April and  ending on the 31st day of March every year. 

 

SHARE CAPITAL 

 

 

2 

 

3.  The  Authorized Share Capital of the Company  shall be such as given the Clause V of The 
Memorandum  of  Association  or  altered,  from  time  to  time.  The  Company  shall  have  the 
power  to  increase  or  reduce  such  capital,  from  time  to  time  in  accordance  with  the 
regulations of the Company and the legislative provisions for the time being in force in this 
behalf  and  with  the  power  to  divide  the  shares  in  the  capital  of  the  Company  for  the  time 
being, whether original of increased, and whether issued or not, into several classes, and to 
attach  thereto  respectively  any  preferential,  qualified,  special  or  deferred  rights,  privileges, 
and conditions as shall from time to time be determined by the Company in accordance with 
the Company's Articles of Association and the legislative provisions from time being in force 
in this behalf. 

ALLOTMENT OF SHARES / 

SECURITIES 

4.  Except  as  provided  in Section  68  of  the  Act,  no  part  of the  funds  of  the  Company  shall  be 

employed in the purchase of the Company's own shares or other specified securities. 

5.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  these  Articles,  any  bond,  debentures,  debenture 
stock or other Securities, may be issued at par, premium or otherwise and with any special 
rights, privileges and conditions as to redemption, surrender, drawings, allotment of Shares, 
as the Board may deem fit at a general meeting. Provided that the debentures with the right 
to allotment of or conversion into Shares shall not be issued except with the sanction of the 
Company  in  a  General  meeting  and  where  at  any  time  it  is  proposed  to  increase  the 
subscribed  capital  of  the  Company  by  the  allotment  of  further  shares  then  subject  to  the 
provisions of Section 62 of the Act, the Board shall issue such shares in the manner set out 
in Section 62 of the Act. 

. 

6.  Except as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction or as by Law required, the Company 
shall  not  be  bound  to,  recognise  any  equitable,  contingent,  future  or  partial  interest  in  any 
share  or  (except  only  as  is  by  these  Articles,  otherwise  expressly  provided)  any  right  in 
respect  of  a  share/security  other  than  an  absolute  right  thereto,  in  accordance  with  these 
Articles, in the person from time to time registered as the holder thereof but the Board shall 
be  at  liberty  at  their  sole  discretion  to  register  any  share  in  the  joint  names  of  any  two  or 
more persons or the survivor or survivors of them. 

7.  The  Companies shall be entitled to treat the registered holder of any share as the absolute 
owner  thereof  and  accordingly  shall  not  be  bound  to  recognise  any  trust,  equitable, 
contingent  future or  partial interest in any fractional part of a share of (except only as is by 
these Articles otherwise expressly provided) and other right in respect of share other than an 
absolute  right  thereto  in  accordance  with  these  Articles  in  the  person  from  time  to  time 
registered as the holder thereof. 

8. 

a)   Every Member or allottee of shares shall be entitled without payment, to receive one or 
more certificates in marketable lots specifying the name of the person in whose favour 
it  is  issued,  the  shares  to  which  it  relates  and  the  amount  paid  up  thereon.  Such 
certificate/s shall be issued only in pursuance of a resolution passed by the Board and 
on  surrender  to  the  Company  of  its  letters  of  allotment  or  its  fractional  coupons  of 
requisite value save in cases of issues, against letter of acceptance or of renunciation, 
or in cases of issues of bonus shares. Every such certificate/s shall be issued under the 
Seal  of  the  Company  which  shall  be  affixed  in  the  presence  of  two  Directors  and  the 
Secretary or some other Authorised Person shall sign the certificate/s, provided that if 
the  composition  of  the  Board  permits  of  it,  atleast  one  of  the  aforesaid  two  Directors 
shall  be  a  person  other  than  a  Managing  or  Wholetime  Director.  Particulars  of  every 
share certificate/s issued shall be entered in the Register of Members against the name 
of the person to whom it has been issued, indicating the date of issue. 

b) 

Any  two  or  more  joint  allottees  of  share  shall  be  treated  as  a  Single  Member  for  the 
purpose of  this  Article and the  Certificate  of any  share, which, may  be  subject  of  joint 
ownership, may  be  delivered to any  one of such joint owners on behalf of all of them. 
For  any  further  certificate  the  Board  shall  be  entitled,  but  shall  not  be  bound  to 
prescribe a charge not exceeding Rupees Twenty. The Company shall comply with the 
provisions of Section 46 of the Act. 

 

3 

 

c) 

d) 

A  Director may sign a Share Certificate by affixing his signature thereon by  means of 
any  machine,  equipment  or  other  mechanical  means,  such  as  engraving  in  metal  or 
lithography,  but  not  by  means  of  a  rubber  stamp,  provided  that  the  Director  shall  be 
responsible for the safe custody of such machine, equipment or other material used for 
the purpose. 

If any certificate of any share or shares be surrendered to the Company for subdivision, 
split  or  consolidation  into  market  units  of  trading  or  if  any  certificate  be  defaced,  old, 
decrept,  worn  out  or  the  cages  in  the  reverse  for  recording  transfer  have  been  duly 
utilised,  then,  upon  surrender  thereof  to  the  company  the  same  to  be  cancelled,  the 
Company shall Issue a new certificate in lieu thereof at free of charge. 

e)  No fee shall be charged for the split, consolidation, renewal and pucca transfer receipt 
into denominations corresponding to the market units of trading, for renounceable letter 
of rights, for registration of any Power of Attorney, Probate, Letters of Administration Or 
Death Certificate or for similar other documents. 

9.  The  rules  under  "The  Companies  (Share  Capital  and  Debentures)  Rules,  2014  "  shall  be 
complied with, in the issue, reissue, renewal of Share Certificates and the form, sealing and 
signing  of  the  certificates  and  records  of  the  certificates,  issues  shall  be  maintained  in 
accordance with the said rules. 

10.  The  Board  of  Directors  may  allot  and  issue  shares  of  the  Company  as  payment  or  part 
payment  for  any  property  purchased  by  the  Company  or  in  respect  of  goods  sold  or 
transferred or machinery or appliances, supplies or for services rendered to the Company in 
or  about  the  formation  of  the  Company  or  the  acquisition  and/or  in  the  conduct  of  its 
business;  and  any  shares  which  may  be  so  allotted  may  be  issued  as  fully/partly  paid  up 
shares and if so issued shall be deemed as fully/partly paid up shares. 

11.  a)  The Directors shall in making the allotments duly observe the provisions of the Act. 

b) 

The  amount  payable  on  application  on  each  share  shall  not  be  less  than  5%  of  the 
nominal value of the share or such other percentage or amount as may be specified by 
Securities Exchange Board by making regulations in this behalf. 

c)  Nothing  herein contained  shall  prevent  the  Directors  from  issuing  fully  paid up  shares 
either  on  payment  of  the  entire nominal  value  thereof  in cash or  in satisfaction  of any 
outstanding debt or obligation of the Company. 

12.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  55  of  the  Act,  the  Company  shall  have  the  power  to 
issue  preference  shares  which  are  or  at  the  option  of  the  Company  are  liable  to  be 
redeemed and  the resolution  authorising such issue  shall prescribe the  manner, terms and 
conditions of redemption. 

13.  On the issue of Redeemable Preference Shares under the provision of Article 12 hereof the 

following provisions shall take effect: 

a)  No  such shares shall be redeemed except  out  of  profits of the Company which would 
otherwise be available for dividend or out of the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares for 
the purpose of the redemption. 

b)  No such shares shall be redeemed unless they are fully paid. 

c)  The  premium,  if  any,  payable  on  redemption  must  have  been  provided  for  out  of  the 
profits  of  the  Company  or  the  Company's  share  Premium  Account  before  the  shares 
are redeemed. 

d)  Where any such shares are redeemed out of the profits of the company there shall, out 
of profits  which would otherwise be  available for  dividend,  be  transferred  to  a reserve 
fund,  to  be  called  the  "Capital  Redemption  Reserve  Account",    a  sum  equal  to  the 
nominal  amount  of  the  share  redeemed  and  the  provisions  of  the  Act  relating  to  the 
reduction of the share capital of the Company shall, except as provided in Section 66 of 
the Act apply as if the Capital Redemption Reserve Account were paid up share capital 
of the Company. 

 

4 

 

14.  The Company may at any time pay a commission to any person for subscribing or  agreeing 
to subscribe  (whether  absolutely  or  conditionally)  for  any  shares,  debentures,  or  debenture 
stock  of  the  Company  or  underwriting  or  procuring  or  agreeing  to  procure  subscriptions 
(whether absolute or conditional) for shares, debentures or debenture stock of the Company 
so that  the  commission  in respect  of the  shares  shall  be  paid, the  provisions  of Section  40 
and  other  statutory  requirements  shall  be  observed  and  complied  with  and  the  rate  of 
commission shall not exceed 5% of the issue price of the shares, 2 1/2% of the price of the 
debentures  or  the  debenture  stock  as  the  case  may  be,  subscribed  or  to  be  subscribed. 
Such commission may be satisfied by the payment of cash or by allotment of fully/partly paid 
shares or partly in one way and partly in the other. 

ISSUE OF SWEAT EQUITY SHARES 

15.  Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 54 of the Act, the Company may issue Sweat 
Equity  Shares,  i.e.  shares  issued  to  Employees  or  Directors  at  a  discount  or  for 
consideration  other  than  cash  for  providing  know-how  or  making  available  rights  in  the 
nature of intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name called, of a class 
of shares already issued if the following conditions are fulfilled: 

(a)  The  issue  of  Sweat  Equity  Shares  is  authorized  by  a  Resolution  passed  by  the 

Company in the General Meeting. 

(b)  The  Resolution  specifies 

their  current  market  price, 
consideration, if any and the class or classes of Directors or Employees to whom such 
equity shares are to be issued. 

the  number  of  shares, 

(c)  Not less than one year has at the date of the issue elapsed since the date on which the 

Company was entitled to commence business. 

(d)  The  sweat  equity  shares  are  issued  in  accordance  with  the  regulations  made  by  the 

Securities and Exchange Board of India in this behalf, if applicable. 

CALLS ON SHARES 

16.  The Board may, from time to time, subject to the terms on which any shares may have been 
issued and subject to the conditions of allotment, by a resolution passed at a meeting of the 
Board  (and  not  by  circular  resolution)  make  such  call  as  it  thinks  fit  upon  the  members  in 
respect  of  all  moneys  unpaid  on  the  shares  held  by  them  respectively  and  each  member 
shall pay the amount of every call so made on him to the person or persons and at the times 
and places appointed by the Board. A call may be made payable by instalments. A call shall 
be  deemed  to  have  been  made  at  the  time  when  the  resolution  authorising  such  call  was 
passed at a meeting of the Board. 

17.  Thirty  days  notice  in  writing  of  any  call  shall  be  given  by  the  Company  specifying  the  time 

and place of payment and the person or persons to whom such call shall be paid. 

18. 

If any member fails to pay call on the day appointed for payment thereof the Directors may at 
any  time  thereafter,  serve  a  notice  on  him  requiring  him  to  pay  the  call  with  any  interest 
which may have accrued. The notice shall name a further day (not earlier than the expiration 
of 14 days from the date of notice) on or before which payment is required by the notice to 
be  and  shall  state  that  in  the  event  of  non-payment  on  or  before  the  time  appointed,  the 
share in respect of which the call was made will be liable to be forfeited. 

19.  On the trial or hearing of any action or suit brought by the Company against any Member or 
his  representatives  for  the  recovery  of  any  money  claimed  to  be  due  to  the  company  in 
respect  of  his  shares,  it  shall  be  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  members  in  respect  of  whose 
Shares the money is sought to be recovered, appears entered in the Register of Members as 
the  holder,  at  or  subsequently  to  the  date  at  which  the  money  sought  to  be  recovered  is 
alleged to have become due on the shares in respect of which such money is sought to be 
recovered; that the resolution making the call is duly recorded, in the minute book, and that 
notice of such call was duly given to the member or his representatives sued in pursuance of 
these  Articles  and  it  shall  not  be  necessary  to  prove  the  appointment  of  the  Directors  who 
made  such  call,  nor  that  a  quorum  of  the  Directors  was  present  at  the  Board  Meetings  at 

 

5 

 

which  any  call  was  made,  was  duly  convened  or  constituted,  nor  any  other  matters 
whatsoever, but the proof of the matters aforesaid shall be conclusive of the debt. 

20.  The  joint-holders  of  a  share  shall  be  jointly  and  severally  liable  to  pay  all  calls  in  respect 

thereof. 

21.  The  Board may, from time to time at its discretion, extend the time fixed for the payment of 
any call and may extend such time as to all or any of the members who from residence at a 
distance  or  other  cause,  the  Board  may  deem  fairly  entitled  to  such  extension,  but  no 
member shall be entitled to such extension save as a matter of grace and favour. 

22. 

If any member fails to pay any call due from him on the day appointed for payment thereof, 
or,  any  such  extension  thereof  as  aforesaid, he shall  be  liable to pay  interest  on  the  same 
from the day appointed for the payment thereof to the time of actual payment at such rate as 
shall  from  time  to  time  be  fixed  by  the  Board  but  not  exceeding  24%  but  nothing  in  this 
Article shall render it obligatory for Board to demand or recover any interest from any such 
Member. 

23.  Any sums, which by terms of issue of a share become payable on allotment or at any fixed 
date, whether on account of the nominal value of the share or by way of premium, shall for 
the purposes of these Articles be deemed to be call duly made and payable on the date on 
which by  the  terms  of issue  the  same  become payable and in case of non-payment all  the 
relevant  provisions  of  these  Articles  as  to  payment  of  interest  and  expenses,  forfeiture  or 
otherwise shall apply as if such sum had become payable by virtue of a call duly made and 
notified. 

24.  The Board may, if thinks fit, agree to and received from any Member, willing to advance the 
same, all or any part of the amounts of his shares beyond the sums actually called up; and 
upon the money so paid in advance, or upon so such thereof from time to time at any time 
thereafter  as  exceeds  the  amount  of  the  calls  then  made  upon  and  due  in  respect  of  the 
shares on account of which such advances are made, the Board may pay or allow interest at 
such rate not less than 15% as the Member paying the sum in advance and the Board agree 
upon.  The  Board  may  agree  to  repay  at  any  time  any  amount  so  advanced  or  may  at  any 
time repay the same upon giving to the Member three month's notice in writing. Money paid 
in advance of calls shall not in respect thereof confer a right to dividend or to participate in 
the profits of the Company. 

FORFEITURE OF SHARES 

25. 

If any member fails to pay any call or instalment of a call on or before the day appointed for 
the payment of the same or any such extension thereof as aforesaid, the Board may, at any 
time, thereafter, during such time as the call or instalment remains unpaid, give notice to him 
requiring him to pay the same together with any interest that may have accrued by reason of 
such non-payment 

26.  The notice shall name a day (not being less than fourteen days from the date of the notice) 
and  place  or  places  on  and  at  which  such  call  or  instalment  and  such  interest  thereon  at 
such rate not exceeding 9 percent per annum as the Directors shall determine from the day 
on  which  such  call  or  instalment  ought  to  have  been  paid  are  to  be  paid.  The  notice  shall 
also  state  that,  in  the  event  of  the  non-payment  at  or  before  the  time  and  at  the  call  was 
made or instalment is payable, will be liable to the forfeited. 

27. 

If  the  requirement  of  any  such  notice  as  aforesaid  were  not  complied  with,  every  or  any 
share  in  respect  of  which  such  notice  has  been  given,  may  at  any  time  thereafter  before 
payment of all calls or instalments, interests be forfeited by a resolution of the Board to that 
effect.  Such  forfeiture  shall  include  all  dividends  declared  or  any  other  moneys  payable  in 
respect of the forfeited share and not actually paid before the forfeiture. 

28.  When  any  share  shall  have  been  so  forfeited,  notice  of  the  forfeiture  shall  be  given  to  the 
member  in  whose  name  it  stood  immediately  prior  to  the  forfeiture  and  an  entry  of  the 
forfeiture with the data thereof, shall forthwith be made in the Register of Members, but no 

 

6 

 

forfeiture shall be in any manner invalidated by any omission or neglect to give such notice 
or to make any such entry as aforesaid. 

29.  Any share so forfeited shall be deemed to be the property of the Company, and may be sold, 
re-allotted  or  otherwise  dispose  off,  either  to  the  original  holder  thereof  or  to  any  other 
person, upon such terms and in such manner as the Board shall think fit. 

30.  The forfeiture of a share involves extinction at the time of the forfeiture, of all interests in and 
all  claims  and demands  against  the  Company,  in respect  of the shares  and  all  other  rights 
incidental  to  the  share,  except  only  such  of  those  rights  as  by  these  Articles  are  expressly 
saved. 

31.  Upon any sale, re-allotment or other disposal under the provisions of the preceding Articles, 
the  certificate  or  certificates  originally  issued  in  respect  of  the  relative  shares  shall  (unless 
the  same  shall  on  demand  by  the  Company  have  been  previously  surrendered  to it  by  the 
defaulting member) stand cancelled and become null and void and have no effect, and the 
Directors shall be entitled to issue a new certificate in respect or a said shares to the person 
or persons entitled thereto. 

32.  The Board may at any time before any share so forfeited shall have been sold, re-allotted or 

otherwise disposed of, annual the forfeiture thereof upon such conditions as it thinks fit. 

LIEN 

33.  The Company shall have a first and paramount lien upon all the shares (other than fully paid-
up shares) registered in the name of each member (whether solely or jointly with others) and 
upon the proceeds of sale thereof for all moneys (Whether presently payable or not) called 
or payable at a fixed time in respect of such shares and no equitable interest in any shares 
shall  be  created  except  upon  the  footing  and  condition  this  Article  will  have  full  effect  and 
such lien shall extend to all dividends and bonuses from time to time declared in respect of 
such shares.  Unless  otherwise agreed the  registration of a transfer  of shares  shall  operate 
as a waiver of the Company's lien if any on shares. The Directors may at any time declare 
any shares wholly or in part to be exempt from the provisions of this clause . 

34.  The shares of any member who is indebted to the Company may be sold by resolution of the 
Directors, to satisfy the Company's lien thereof, and be transferred to the purchaser without 
the  consent  and  not  withstanding  any  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  indebted  member  and 
complete title to the share of any such member which shall be sold and transferred against 
indebted  member  and  all  persons  claiming  under  him  whether  he  may  be  indebted  to  the 
company in fact or not and thereupon, the point of the purchaser shall be deemed to be the 
holder of such shares discharged from all dues and calls made prior to such purchase, and 
shall  not  be  bound  to  see  to  the  application  of  the  purchase  money  nor  his  titles  to  the 
shares  be  affected  by  any  irregularity  or  invalidity  in  the  proceedings  with  reference  to  the 
sale. 

35.  No  sale  however  shall  be  made  under  Article  36  unless  any  part  of  the  debt  in  respect  of 
which the  lien  exists is  presently  payable. Further  such right  of sale shall  not  be  exercised 
until  the  expiry  of  14  days  after  the  service  of  the  notice  in  writing  stating  and  demanding 
payment of such part  of the amount in respect of which the lien exists, has been served to 
the  registered  holder  for  the  time  being  of  shares  or  the  person  entitled  by  reason  of  his 
death or insolvency, to the shares. 

36.  The  net proceeds of any such sale shall be applied in or towards satisfaction of such debt, 
liabilities and engagements in respect of which the lien exists and the residue, if any, be paid 
(subject  to  like  lien  for  sum  not  presently  payable  as  existed  upon  the  shares  prior  to  the 
sale)  to such members  or  his  representatives  or  to the persons  entitled  to the  share at  the 
time of the sale. 

37. 

 The  Company  at  its  General  Meeting  may,  from  time  to  time,  by  an  ordinary  resolution 
increase the capital  by the  creation of  new shares,  such increase  to be  of such  aggregate 

INCREASE OF CAPITAL 

 

7 

 

amount  and  to  be  divided  into  shares  of  such  respective  amounts  as  the  resolution  shall 
prescribe. 

The  new  shares  shall  be  issued  upon  such  terms  and  conditions  and  with  such  rights  and 
privileges  annexed  thereto,  as  the  resolution  shall  prescribe  and  in  particular,  such  shares 
may be issued with a preferential or qualified right to dividends and in the distribution of the 
assets  of  the  Company,  and  with  a  right  of  voting  at  General  Meetings  of  the  Company  in 
confirmity with Sections 108 and 109 of the Act. Whenever the Capital of the Company has 
been increased under the provisions of this Article, the Directors shall comply with provisions 
of Section 64 of the Act. 

38.  Except  so  far  as  otherwise  provided  by  the  conditions  of  issue  or  by  these  presents,  any 
capital  raised  by  the  creation  of  new  shares,  shall  be  considered  as  part  of  the  existing 
capital and shall be subject to the provisions herein contained, with reference to the payment 
of  calls  and  instalments,  forfeiture,  lien,  surrender,  transfer  and  transmission,  voting  and 
otherwise. 

REDUCTION OF CAPITAL 

39.  Subject to the confirmation of the National Company Law Tribunal, the Company may from 
time  to  time  by  special  resolution  and  in  any  manner  authorised  by  law  reduce  its  share 
capital in any way and in particular and without prejudice : 

a)  Extinguish or reduce the liability on any of its shares in respect of the share capital not 

paid up. 

b)  Either  with  or  without  extinguishing,  reducing  liability  on  any  of  its  shares,  cancel  any 

paid up share capital which is lost, or is unrepresented by-available assets; or 

c)  Either with or without extinguishing, or reducing liability on any of its shares, cancel any 
paid up capital which is in excess of the wants of the Company and may if and so far as 
if necessary alter its memorandum by reducing the amount of its share capital and of its 
shares accordingly.  

40.  Subject to the provisions of Section 61 of the Act, the Company in General Meeting may by 
an ordinary resolution from time to time, subdivide or consolidate its shares, or any of them, 
and  the resolution  whereby  any  share  issued  divided, may  determine  that,  as  between  the 
holders of the shares resulting from such subdivision one or more of such shares have some 
preference or special advantage as regards dividend, capital or otherwise over as compared 
with the  others  or  other.  Subject  as  aforesaid the  Company  in General  Meeting  may  by  an 
ordinary resolution also cancel shares which have not been taken or agreed to be taken by 
any  person  and  diminish  the  amount  of  its  share  capital  by  the  amount  of  the  shares  so 
cancelled. 

41.  Whenever  the  capital,  by  reason  of  the  issue  of  preference  shares  or  otherwise,  is  divided 
into  different  classes  of  shares,  all  or  any  of  the  rights  and  privileges  attached  to  each 
classmay subject to the provisions of Section 48 of the Act, be modified, commuted, affected 
or abrogated, or dealt with by agreement between the Company and any person purporting 
to contract on behalf of that class, provided such agreement is ratified in writing by holders of 
atleast three fourths in nominal value of the issued shares of the class or if confirmed by a 
special  resolution  passed  at  a  separate  General  Meeting  of  the  holders  of  shares  of  that 
class. 

42.  (a)   Where at any time, it is proposed to increase the subscribed capital of the Company by 
allotment  of  further  shares,  then  such  further  shares,  shall  be  offered  to  the  equity 
shares of the Company, in proportion, as nearly as circumstances admit, to the capital 
paid-up  on  those  shares  at  that  date,  such  offer  shall be  made  by  a  notice specifying 
the number of shares offered and limiting a time not being less than 15 days and not 
exceeding 30 days from the 

 

8 

 

date  of  the  offer  within  which  the  offer,  if  not  accepted  will  be  deemed  to  have  been 
declined.  After  the  expiry  of  the  time  specified  in  the  notice  aforesaid  or  on  receipt  of 
earlier  intimation  from  the  person  to  whom  such  notice  is  given  that  he  declines  to 
accept the shares offered, the Board may dispose off them in such manner which is not 
dis-advantageous to the shareholders and the Company. 

(b)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub-clause, the Company, may 

i) 

by  a  special  resolution  issue  further  shares  to  any  person,  and  such  person  or 
persons may not include the persons who at the date of the offer are the holders of 
the equity shares of the Company. 

(c)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-clause  (a)  above,  but  subject,  however,  to 
Section 62(3) of the Act, the Company may increase its subscribed capital on exercise 
of  an  option  attached  to  the  debentures  issued  or  loans  raised  by  the  Company  to 
convert such debentures or loans into shares in the Company. 

TRANSFER & TRANSMISSION OF SHARES 

43.  The  Company  shall  keep a  "Register  of Transfers"  and therein shall  be  fairly  and distinctly 

entered particulars of every transfer and transmission of any shares. 

The instrument of transfer of any share shall be in writing and all the provisions of Section 56 
of the Act and of any statutory modification thereof for the time being shall be duly complied 
with in respect of all transfers of shares and registration thereof. Every instrument of transfer 
of shares shall be in accordance with and in the form prescribed under the Act or the Rules 
made thereunder. 

Every  such  instrument  of  transfer  shall  be  executed  both  by  the  Transferor  and  the 
Transferee  and  attested  and  the  transferor  shall  be  deemed  to  remain  the  holder  of  such 
shares until the name of the transferee shall have been entered in the Register of Members 
in respect thereof. 

44.  The  Board  shall  have  power,  on  giving  previous  notice  of  a  sufficient  number  of  days  as 
prescribed  under  the  applicable  laws  from  time  to  time  by  advertisement  in  a  newspaper 
circulating  in  the  district  in  which  the  registered  office  of  the  Company  is  situated,  to  close 
the Transfer Books, the Register of Members or Register of Debenture Holders at such time 
or  times  and  for  such  period  or  periods,  but  not  exceeding  the  number  of  days  as  may  be 
prescribed under applicable laws from time to time, as may seem expedient. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

 Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  58  of  the  Act  and  Section  22(A)  of  the  Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, the Board, without assigning any reason for such refusal, 
may within one month from the date of which the instrument of transfer was delivered to the 
Company, decline to register any transfer of shares and in the case of shares not fully paid 
up,  may  refuse  to  register  a  transfer  to  a  transferee  of  whom  they  do  not  approve.  If  the 
Board  refuses  to  register  the  transfer  of  any  shares  the  Company  shall  within  one  month 
from the date on which the instrument of transfer was lodged with the Company send to the 
transferee and the transferor notice of the refusal provided that registration of transfer shall 
not  be  refused  on  the  ground  of  the  transferor  being  either  alone  or  jointly  with  any  other 
person or persons indebted to the Company on any account whatsoever except a lien on the 
shares. 

 Where  in  the  case  of  partly  paid  shares  an  application  for  registration  is  made  by  the 
transferor, the Company shall give notice of the application to  the transferee in accordance 
with the provisions of section 56 of the Act. 

In  the case of death of any or more the persons named in the Register of Members as the 
joint  holder  of  any  shares,  the  survivors  shall  be  the  only  persons  recognised  by  the 
Company as having any title or interest in such share, but nothing herein contained shall be 
taken to release the estate of a deceased joint holder from any liability on shares held by him 
jointly with any other person. 

 

9 

 

48  .The  executors  or  administrators  or  holders  of  Succession  Certificate  or  the  legal 
representatives of deceased member (not being one or two of joint holders) shall be the only 
person recognised by the Company as having any title to the shares registered in the name 
of  such  member,  and  the  Company  shall  not  be  bound  to  recognise  such  executors  or 
administrators  or  holders  of  a  Succession  Certificate  or  the  legal  representatives  unless  
such executors or administrators or legal representatives shall have first obtained probate or 
Letter  of  Administration  or  Succession  Certificate,  as  the  case  may  be,  from  a  duly 
constituted  Court  in  the  Union  of  India  and  a  clearance  certificate  from  the  Estate  Duly 
Authorities  provided  that  in  case  where  the  Board  in  its  absolute  discretion,  thinks  fit,  the 
Board  may  dispense  with  production  of  probate  or  Letter  of  Administration  or  Succession 
Certificate,  upon  such  terms  as  to  indemnify  or  otherwise  as  the  Board  in  its  absolute 
discretion  may  think  necessary  and  under  these  Articles  register  the  name  of  any  person 
who  claims  to  be  absolutely  entitled  to  the  shares  standing  in  the  name  of  a  deceased 
member, as a member . 

49.  No  share  shall  in  any  circumstances  be  transferred  to  any  insolvent  or  person  of  unsound 

mind. 

50.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Articles  48  and  49,  any  person  becoming  entitled  to  shares  in 
consequence  of  the  death,  lunacy,  bankruptcy,  or  insolvency  of  any  members,  or  by  any 
lawful  means  other  than  by  a  transfer  in  accordance  with  these  Articles  may,  with  the 
consent  of  the  Board  (which  it  shall  not  be  under  any  obligation  to  give),  upon  producing 
such evidence that  he sustains  the  character  in respect  of which he  proposes  to  act  under 
this Article, or of his title, as the  Board thinks sufficient, either by registering himself as the 
holder  of  the shares  or  elect  to have some  person  nominated  by  him and  approved  by  the 
Board registered as  such holder,  provided, nevertheless, if  such person  shall  elect  to have 
his nominee registered he shall testify that election by executing in favour of his nominee an 
instrument of transfer in accordance with the provisions, herein contained, and until he does 
so, he shall not be freed from any liability in respect of shares. 

51.  A  person entitled to a share by transmission shall, subject to the right of Directors to retain 
such  dividend  or  money  as  hereinafter  provided  be  entitled  to  receive,  and  may  give  a 
discharge for any dividends or other moneys payable in respect of the share. 

52. 

 The  Company  shall  incur  no  liability  or  responsibility  whatever  in  consequence  of  its 
registering or giving effect  to any transfer of shares  made or purporting to be  made by  any 
apparent  legal  owner  thereof  (as  shown  or  appearing  in  the  Register  of  Members)  to  the 
prejudice of persons having or claiming any equitable right, title or interest to or  in the said 
shares, notwithstanding that the Company may have had notice of such equitable right, title 
or  interest  or  notice  prohibiting  registration  of  such  transfer,  and  may  have  entered  such 
notice, or referred thereto in any book of the Company, and the Company shall not be bound 
or  required  to regard  or  attend  or  give effect  to any  notice which may  be given  to it  of  any 
equitable right, title or interest or be under any liability whatsoever for refusing or neglecting 
to do, though it may have been entered or referred to in some book of the Company; but the 
Company shall nevertheless be at liberty to regard and attend to any such notice; and give 
effect thereto if the Board shall so think fit. 

53. 

 No  charge  be  made  by  the  Company  for  registration  of  transfers  of  its  shares  and 
debentures. 

NOMINATION OF SHARES 

 

54. 

(a)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  hereinabove,  every  shareholder  of  the  Company 
may  at any  time,  nominate,  in the  prescribed manner,  a person  to whom  his  shares  in 
the Company shall vest in the event of his death 

(b)  Where  the  shares  in  the  Company  are  held  by  more  than  one  person  jointly,  the  joint 
holders  may  together  nominate,  in  the  prescribed  manner,  a  person  to  whom  all  the 
rights  in  the  shares  in  the  company,  shall  vest  in  the  event  of  death  of  all  the  joint-
holders 

(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
deposition,  whether  testamentary  or  otherwise,  in  respect  of  such  shares  in  the 
Company, where a nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to confer on any 
person the right to vest the shares in the Company, the nominee shall, on the death of 

 

the shareholder or as the case may be, on the death of the joint holders become entitled 
to  all  the  rights  in  such  shares,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  persons,  unless  the 
nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed manner. 

(d)  Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the holder of the shares, to make the 
nomination  to  appoint  in  the  prescribed  manner,  any  person  to  become  entitled  to 
shares in the Company, in the event of his death, during the minority. 

 

DIRECTORS 

55.  The  Company  shall  have  not  less  than  three  and  not  more  than  fifteen  Directors  including 
the nominated, technical, special, additional, debenture Directors, if any, and also including 
any other kind of Director on the Board. 

 

56.  Any person whether member of the Company or not may be appointed as a Director and no 

qualification by way of shareholding be required from any Director. 

57.  The  Company  shall  appoint such number  of  directors  as  Independent  Directors  as  may  be 
required under the provisions of the Act and rules thereunder, if applicable. The candidates 
to be appointed as Independent Director shall hold such qualifications and shall comply with 
such conditions as may be prescribed under the Act. 

58.  The Company shall appoint such number of women directors as may be required under the 

provisions of the Act and rules thereunder. 

 

10 

 

 

 

59.  The  Board may  appoint a person,  not being  a person holding any  alternate  directorship for 
any other director in the Company, or holding directorship in the same company, to act as an 
alternate  director  for  a  director  during  his  absence  for  a  period  of  not  less  than  3  (three) 
months from India. The alternate shall automatically vacate office upon the earlier of (a) the 
return  of  the  original  director  to  India,  and  (b)  completion  of  the  tenure  of  the  director  to 
whom  he  is  an  alternate.  No  person  shall  be  appointed  as  an  alternate  director  for  an 
independent director unless he is qualified to be appointed as an independent director under 
the provisions of this Act. 

60. 

In  case the Union Government or any State Government or any Financial Institution grants 
loans, renders any other form of financial assistance or accepts participation in the capital of 
the  Company,  such  Government  or  Financial  Institution  shall,  if  the  agreement  between  it 
and the  Company  so provides  be  entitled  to nominate its  representation  or  representatives 
on  the  Board  of  Directors.  Such  Directors  shall  cease  to  be  Directors  upon  repayment  of 
such  loan,  their  ceasing  to  be  interested  in  the  Company  in  any  fiduciary  capacity  or  the 
expiry  of  the  term  stipulated  in  the  agreement  for  termination  of  such  rights  of  nomination. 
Such  nominating  body  may,  from  time  to  time  remove  its  nominees  and  appoint  another 
nominee  or  nominees  in  their  place  and  while  holding  such  office  such  nominees  shall  be 
liable to retirement by rotation. 

61.  The nominee Directors appointed by the Financial Institutions shall not be liable to retire by 

rotation. 

62. 

If  any  Director  appointed  by  the  Company  in  General  Meeting  vacates  office  as  Director 
before his term  of office will expire in the normal course, the resulting casual vacancy may 
be filled up by the Board at a meeting of the Board of Directors but any person so appointed 
shall  retain  his  office  so  long  as  the  vacating  Director  would  have  retained  the  same  if  no 
vacancy  had occurred,  provided that  the  Board  of Directors  may  not  fill  such a vacancy  by 
appointing  thereto  any  person  who  has  been  removed  from  the  office  of  Director  under 
Section 169 of the Act. 

63.  Each Director shall be paid out of the funds of the Company as sitting fees for such sums as 
may  be  decided  by  the  Board  of  Directors,  not  exceeding  the  sums  prescribed  under  the 
applicable  laws  from  time  to  time,  for  every  meeting  of  the  Directors  or  any  Committee 
thereof  at  which  he  shall  be  present  in  person,  besides  travelling,  boarding,  lodging  and 
other expenses. 

64.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  197  of  the  Act,  and  other  applicable  provisions,  the 
Company shall have the power to pay consulting charges/fees to non-executive directors in 
consideration for professional services rendered by them to the Company. 

65.  (a)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  188  of  the  Act,  if  any  Director  shall  be  appointed  to 
advice  the  Directors  as  an  expert  or  be  called  upon  to  perform  extra  services  or  make 
special exertions for any of the  purposes  of the Company the  Directors may pay  to such 
Director such special remuneration as they think fit which remuneration may be in the form 
of either salary, commission or lumpsum and may either be in addition to or in substitution 
of the remunerations specified in the last preceding Article. 

(b) Subject to provisions of the Act the Board of Directors may employ from time to time any 
Directors to perform any work or supply goods required by the Company or to serve the 
Company  in  any  professional  capacity  or  in  any  other  capacity  or  character  and  may 
remunerate  him  for  such  work  or  goods  or  services  as  they  may  think  proper  and  may 
enter into contracts with him for the purpose aforesaid, but no Directors shall vote at any 
Directors' meeting upon and question affecting his own employment  as  aforesaid  or  any 
other  contract  relating  thereto  provided  also  that  the 

11 

 

 

12 

 

Directors shall disclose their interest as required by the provisions of Sections 184 and 
188 of the Act. 

66. 

 The  Directors  shall  have  power  from  time  to  time,  to  appoint  any  other  person  to  be 
Directors, provided the total number of Directors shall not at any time exceed the maximum 
number  fixed  as  above.  But  any  Directors  so appointed shall  hold office only  until  the  next 
following Annual General Meeting of the Company and shall then be eligible for re-election. 

67.  The Company may, by ordinary resolution, remove an ordinary Director other than a Director 
appointed by  the Central Government in pursuance of section  161, before the expiry of his 
period  of  office  and  fill  up  the  vacancy  thus  created  in  the  manner  and  subject  to  the 
provisions of Section 169 of the Act. 

68.  The  Directors  may  elect  one  of  themselves  to  the  office  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Directors. The Chairman so appointed shall preside over all the meetings of the Board and 
the General Meetings during the tenure of office. 

69.  At  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Company  to  be  held  in  every  year  one  third  of  such 
Directors  are liable to retire by  rotation  for  the  time  being  or,  if  their  number  is not  three or 
multiple of three, then the number nearest to one third shall retire from office and they will be 
eligible for re-election. 

70. 

If  at any Annual General Meeting at which an election of Directors ought to take place, the 
place of any  retiring  Director  is  not  filled  up,  he  shall if  willing  to continue in office until  the 
Annual  General  Meeting  in  the  next  year  and  so  on  from  year  until  his  place  is  filled  up, 
unless  it  shall  be  determined  at  such  meeting  (on  due  notice)  to  reduce  the  number  of 
Directors in office. 

71.  The  Directors  to  retire  in  every  year  shall  be  those  who  have  been  longest  in  office  since 
their last election, but as between persons who become Directors on the same day, those to 
retire shall (unless they otherwise agree among themselves) be determined by lot. 

72.  Subject to the provisions of Sections 184, 188, 189 and 190of the Act, the Directors shall not 
be  disqualified  by  reason  of  his  or  their  office  as  such  from  contracting  with  the  Company 
either  as  vendor,  purchaser,  lender,  agent,  broker,  lessor  or  otherwise  nor  shall  any  such 
contract or arrangement  entered into by or  on behalf  of the  Company with such Director or 
with any Company or partnership in which he shall be a member or otherwise interested be 
avoided  nor  shall  any  Director  so  contracting  or  being  such  member  or  so  interested  be 
liable to account to the Company for any profit realised by such contract or arrangement by 
reason only of such Director holding that office or of fiduciary relation thereby established but 
the  nature  of  the  interest  must  be  disclosed  by  him  or  them  at  the  meeting  of  Directors  at 
which  the  contract  or  arrangement  is  determined  if  the  interest  then  exists  or  in  any  other 
case at the first meeting of the Directors after the acquisition of the interest. 

MEETING OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

73.  A  Director from time to time or  a Managing Director upon the request of any Director shall 
convene  the  meeting  of  the  Board.  All  Meetings  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company 
shall unless and otherwise determined by  the Board, be held at the  Registered Office. The 
quorum  for  a  Board  Meeting  shall  be  two  Directors  or  one  third  of  the  total  strength  (any 
fraction contained in one third being rounded off as one) whichever is higher.  

74.  The  Directors  may  meet  together  as  a  Board  from  time  to  time  and  shall  hold  a  minimum 
number of four meetings of its Board of Directors every year in such a manner that not more 
than one hundred and twenty days shall intervene between two consecutive meetings of the 
Board. The Directors may adjourn and otherwise regulate their meetings as they think fit. 

75.  Save  with  the  consent  in  writing  of  all  the  Directors,  reasonable  notice,  in  writing,  shall  be 
given of every meeting of the Board to every Director for the time being in India, and at his 
usual address in India to every other Director. Notice of the date of such meeting shall also 
be  given  by  cable/electronic  mail  to every  Director  not  for  the  time  being  in India.  Provided 
that  a  meeting  of  the  Board  may  be  called  at  shorter  notice  to  transact  urgent  business 
subject to the condition that at least one independent director, if any, shall be present at the 
meeting. 

76.  Save  as  otherwise  expressly  provided  in  the  act,  a  resolution  in  writing  circulated  in  draft 
together  with  all  necessary  papers  and  signed  by  all  or  a  majority  of  the  members  of  the 

 

13 

 

Board  of Directors  or  of a  Committee  thereof for  the  time  being  entitled  receive notice of a 
meeting of the Board or Committee shall be as valid and effectual as if it had been passed at 
a meeting of the Board or Committee duly convened and held. In the event of the signature 
of anyone or more of the Directors to any such of resolution being affixed on different dates 
the  said  resolution  shall  unless  otherwise  stated  therein  be  deemed  to  be  passed  on  the 
date of signature of the Director signing last. 

77. 

 The  Company  shall  have  the  power  to  hold  Board  or  Committee  Meetings  through  the 
means of video, web, teleconferencing or other electronic means and also allow Directors to 
participate  in  the  Board  or  Committee  meetings  through  the  means  of  video,  web, 
teleconferencing or other electronic means subject to the applicable provisions, if any, of the 
Act  and  other  regulatory  provisions,  if  any,  and  all  relevant  articles  dealing  with  Board  or 
Committee meetings shall be read mutatis mutandis. 

POWERS OF THE BOARD 

78.  The business of the Company shall be managed by the Directors who may pay all expenses 
incurred in getting up and registering the Company and may exercise all such powers of the 
Company  as  are  not  by  the  Act  or  any  statutory  modifications  thereof  for  the  time  being  in 
future  or  by  these  Articles,  required  to  be  exercised  by  the  Company  in  General  Meeting 
subject nevertheless, to any regulation of these Articles or the provisions of the said Act, and 
to  such  regulations  being  not  inconsistent  with  the  aforesaid  regulations  or  provisions  as 
may  be  prescribed  by  the  Company  in  General  Meeting,  but  no  regulations  made  by  the 
Company  in General  Meetings  shall invalidate and  prior  of the Directors  which would have 
been valid if that regulation had not been made. 

79.  The  Board  shall  have  power  to  appoint  servicing  consultants  and  agents  for  purchase  and 
sale of goods required for manufacture by the Company on such terms and conditions as to 
period,  remuneration,  commission  etc.,  and  they  may  deem  fit  subject  to  the  relevant 
provisions of the Act. 

80.  Subject to the provisions of Section  179  of the Act, the Directors may delegate any of their 
powers to a committee consisting of such member or members of their body as they think fit, 
or to any category of managerial personnel or pay any principal officer of the Company or to 
principal officer of the Branch office of the Company. Any such committee or delegates shall, 
in  exercise  of  the  powers  so  delegated,  conform  to  any  regulations  that  may  from  time  to 
time be imposed on them by the Directors. 

81.  Without prejudice to the General powers conferred by the proceedings, Articles and powers 
conferred by these Articles and subject to the provisions of Act, the Board of Directors shall 
have the following powers, that is to say: 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

To  pay  the  costs,  charges  and  expenses  preliminary  and  incidental  to  the  promotion, 
establishment and registration of the Company. 

At  their  discretion  to  pay  for  any  property  rights,  privileges  acquire  by,  or  in  shares, 
bonds,  debentures  or  other  securities  of  the  Company  and  any  such  shares  may  be 
issued either as fully paid up or with such amount credited as paid up thereon as may 
be agreed upon subject always to the liability of all share holders in regard to the debts 
of  the  Company  and  any  such  bonds,  debentures,  or  other  securities  may  be  either 
specifically  charged  upon  all  or  any  part  of  the  property  of  the  Company  and  its 
uncalled capital or not so charged. 

To take on lease, purchase or otherwise acquire for the Company, any property right or 
privileges, which the Company is authorised to acquire, at such price and generally on 
such terms and conditions as they may think fit. 

To appoint any persons or person to hold in trust for the Company, property belonging 
to the Company or in which it is interested or for any other purposes and to  execute all 
such instruments and to do all such things as may be necessary or requisite in relation 
to any such trust. 

 

14 

 

e) 

f) 

g) 

h) 

i) 

j) 

k) 

I) 

To sell, let, exchange or otherwise dispose of absolutely or conditionally any part of the 
property, privileges and undertakings of the Company upon such terms and conditions 
and for such consideration as they may think fit. 

 To  appoint  and  at  their  discretion  remove  or  suspend  such  agents,  managers, 
secretaries for permanent, temporary or special service as they may from time to time 
think fit and to determine their powers and duties and fix their salaries or emoluments 
and  to  require  securities  in  such  instances  and  to  such  amounts  as  they  think  fit  and 
generally  to provide  for  the  management  of  the  Company  in different  parts  of India or 
outside in any countries and to establish and maintain branch offices. 

To  buy  or  procure  the  supply  of  all  article  goods,  merchandise  and  other  moveable 
property required for the purpose of the Company and to sell them. 

To  appoint  any  person  or  persons  to  be  Attorneys  of  the  Company  for  each  purpose, 
and  with  powers,  authorities  and  discretions  not  exceeding  those  vested  in  or 
exercisable  by  the  Board  and  for  such  periods  and  subject  to  such  conditions  as  the 
Board from time to time think fit. 

To enter into, carry out, rescind or vary financial arrangement with any banks, persons 
or corporations for or in connection with the Company's business affairs and pursuant 
to  or  in  connection  with  such  arrangements  to  deposit,  pledge  or  hypothecate  any 
property  of  the  Company  and  to  execute  and  register  any  document  relating  to  the 
same. 

 To  make  and  give  receipt,  realise  and  other  discharges  for  money  payable  to  the 
Company and for the claims and demands of the Company. 

To  compound and allow time for the payment or satisfaction of any debts due to or by 
Company  and  any  claim  or  and  demand  by  or  against  the  Company  and  to  refer 
matters to arbitration and observe and perform the awards. 

To  sign,  draw,  accept,  endorse  and  negotiate  and  discount,  for  and  on  behalf  of  the 
Company,  all  such  cheques,  bills  of  exchange,  promissory  notes,  hundies,  drafts, 
government  and  other  securities  and  all  other  documents,  whether  negotiable  or 
otherwise as shall be normal in or for carrying on the affairs of the Company. 

m)  To  institute,  prosecute,  defend,  compromise  or  abandon  any  legal  proceedings  by  or 

against the Company or its officers or otherwise concerning affairs of the Company. 

n) 

o) 

p) 

q) 

r) 

To invest and deal with any of the moneys of the Company not immediately required for 
the  purpose  thereof  upon  such  securities  in  investments  and  in  such  manner  as  they 
may think fit, and from time to time to vary or realise such securities and investments. 

To enter into negotiations and contracts and to rescind or vary all such contracts and to 
do  all  acts,  deeds  and  things  in  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  the  Company  as  they 
consider expedient for or in relation to any of the matters aforesaid or otherwise for the 
purpose of the Company. 

To  make and repeal, from  time to time bye-laws for the regulations of the business of 
the Company, its officers and servants. 

 To  deposit  money  on  security  or  otherwise  with  other  persons  or  company  or 
companies, whether Banking Company or not, and to invest any funds of the Company 
that are not required for the time being for the general purpose of the Company in such 
investments  (other  than  the  share  of  the  Company)  as  may  be  thought  proper  and  to 
hold,  exchange,  sell,  vary  and  dispose  off  or  deal  with  any  of  the  investments  of  the 
companies as may be deemed expedient. 

To give credit or deal upon credit with or without security with any persons, including a 
member of the Company of such amount upon such terms and conditions as they shall 
think fit. 

 

15 

 

s) 

t) 

To call any General Meeting of the Company to transact such business as is mentioned 
in the notice convening the meeting. 

To  exercise and to carry into effect any or all of the objects and powers mentioned or 
referred to in the Memorandum of Association. 

BORROWING POWERS 

79  .  The  Directors  may  from  time  to  time  at  their  discretion  raise  or  borrow  or  secure  the 
payments  of  any  sum  or  sums  of  money  for  the  purpose  of  Company's  business  and  may 
secure the payment for or repayment of such money by mortgage or charge upon the whole 
or  any  part  of  the  assets  and  property  of  the  Company  (present  and  future)  including  its 
uncalled and unpaid capital. 

80.  Subject to aforesaid, any bonds, debenture stock or other securities issued by the Company 
shall be under the control of Directors who may issue them upon such terms and conditions 
and in such manner and for such consideration as they shall consider to be for the benefit of 
the Company. 

81.  The  Directors  may  at  any  time  pay  or  agree  to  pay  to  any  person,  commission  which  may 
represent a share in the profits of the Company or in any other manner either in a lumpsum 
or  in  yearly,  half-yearly  or  quarterly  instalment,  in  consideration  of  his  guarantee,  to 
Debenture  Holders  or  other  creditors  on  behalf  of  the  Company  the  payments  on  the  face 
value of the Debentures or other liabilities. Such commission will be payable only out of the 
profits of the Company. 

82.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  73  of  the  Act  and  the  rules  made  thereunder  the 
Directors  may  receive  deposits  merely  for  the  purpose  of  financing  the  business  of  the 
Company  bearing  interest  at  such  rates  as  the  Directors  may  fix  which  may  be  made 
payable monthly,  quarterly,  half-yearly  or  at the  beginning  or  the  end  of  the term  for  which 
the sums are borrowed. 

83. 

If  the Director or any other person shall become personally liable, for payment of any such 
primarily  due  from  the  Company,  the  Directors  may  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed  any 
mortgage, charge or security over the whole or any part of assets of the Company by way of 
indemnity  to secure of  the  Directors  or  persons  so-becoming  liable as  aforesaid  for  loss  in 
respect of such liability. 

MANAGING DIRECTOR, MANAGER AND SECRETARY 

84.  (A) MANAGING DIRECTOR 

Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  the  Directors  from  time  to  time  entrust  to  and  confer 
upon  the  Managing  Director  or  Managing  Directors  for  the  time  being  such  of  the  powers 
exercisable under these presents by the Directors as they may think fit, and may confer such 
powers for such time, and to be exercised for such objects and purposes  upon such terms 
and  conditions  with  such  restrictions  as  they  think  expedient  and  they  may  confer  such 
powers  either  collaterally  with  or  the  exclusion  of,  and  in  substitution  for  all  or  any  of  the 
powers  of  the  Director  in  that  behalf,  and  may  from  time  to  time  withdraw,  revoke,  alter  or 
vary all or any of such powers. 

(B)  MANAGER 

Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  196  and  any  other  applicable  Sections  of  the  Act,  the 
Board  shall  have  the  power  to  appoint  a  Manager  upon  such  terms  and  conditions  as  the 
Board thinks fit. 

(C)  SECRETARY 

Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  from  time  to  time,  appoint  for  such  term  and  at  such 
remuneration  and  upon  such  conditions  as  it  may  think  fit  and  its  discretion,  remove  any 
individual (hereinafter called "the Secretary") who shall have such qualifications as may  be 
prescribed  under  the  Act,  to  perform  such  duties  and  functions,  which  by  the  Act  or 
otherwise are  to  be  performed  by the  Secretary  of the  Company  and to  execute any  other 

 

16 

 

duties  and  functions  which  may,  from  time  to  time,  be  assigned  to  the  Secretary  by  the 
Board or the Managing Director. 

Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act,  a  Director  may  be  appointed  as  Secretary.  Any 
provisions  of  the  Act  or  these  regulations  requiring  or  authorising  a  thing  to  be  done  by  a 
Director and the Manager or Secretary shall not be satisfied by its being done by the same 
person acting both as Director and as or in the place of the Manager or the Secretary. 

GENERAL MEETING 

85.  The Company shall comply with the provisions of Sections 96 to 109 of the Act or  statutory 

modifications thereof in the calling and conduct of meetings. 

86.  1)   All General Meetings of the Company may be convened by giving not less than 21 days 
clear  notice in writing  or  through  electronic  mode  in such manner as  may  be  prescribed.  A 
General  Meeting  may  be  called  after  giving  a  shorter  notice  than  that  specific  under  sub-
clause (I)  if  consent  is  accorded  thereto  in the case  of  Annual  General  Meeting  by  95%  of 
the  members  entitled  to  vote  thereat  and  in  the  case  of  any  other  meeting  by  majority  of 
members of the Company holding not less than 95% of such part the paid up capital of the 
Company, as given right to vote at the meeting. 

2)  Every  notice of  meeting  of  the  Company  shall  specify  the  place, date and  the  hour  of 
General Meeting shall contain a statement of the business to be transacted thereunder. 

 

17 

 

3)  Every Annual General Meeting shall be called on a day which is not a National holiday, 
and shall be held during the business hours at the registered office of the Company or 
at  any  other  place  in  the  city,  in  which  the  registered  office  is  situated  and  the  notice 
calling for such meeting shall specify it as the Annual General Meeting. 

4)  The  Company  may  subject  to  the  provisions  of  section  110  of  the  Act  and  the  rules 
thereunder  as  amended  from  time  to  time  pass  such  resolution(s)  as  required  to  be 
passed  in  accordance  with  provisions  of  the  said  Act  and  Rules  thereunder  by  Postal 
ballot  instead  of  transacting  the  business  at  the  General  Meeting.  Such  resolution,  if 
assented  to  by  the  majority  of  the  shareholders  by  postal  ballot,  shall  be  deemed  to 
have been passed at the General Meeting convened in that behalf. 

87.  The Board may, whenever it thinks fit call General Meetings and General Meeting other than 

Annual General Meeting shall be an Extraordinary General Meeting. 

The Board shall on the requisition of members convene any Extraordinary General Meeting 
of the Company in the circumstances and in the manner provided under section 100 of the 
Act. 

88.  Save  as  otherwise  provided  herein,  the  quorum  for  the  general  meetings  shall  be  as 
provided  in  section  103  of  the  Act  and  no  business  shall  be  transacted  at  any  General 
Meeting  unless  the  requisite quorum  is  present  at the  commencement  of meeting. If within 
half an hour from the time appointed for a meeting a quorum is not present, the meeting, if 
called upon the requisition of members, shall be dissolved, in any other case, it shall stand 
adjourned  to  the  same  day  in  the  next  week  at  the  same  time  and  place  and  if  at  the 
adjourned meeting  a quorum is  not  present  within half  an  hour  from the  time  appointed for 
the meeting the members present shall constitute the quorum. 

VOTES OF MEMBERS 

89.  Notwithstanding  anything  contrary  contained  in  the  Articles  of  Association  of  the  Company 
may,  in  pursuance  of  and  subject  to    compliance  of  provisions  of  applicable  rules, 
regulations,  circulars,  guidelines,  notifications  etc.  as  may  be  specified  by  the  Ministry  of 
Corporate Affairs (MCA), Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Stock Exchanges of 
any competent authority and the provisions, if any, which may be laid don in this regard by 
any amendment in or re-enactment of the Companies Act, or by the rules, regulations made 
thereunder  or  the  Listing  Agreement  with  Stock  Exchange,  from  time  to  time,  allow  the 
member(s) of the Company to participate in the General Meeting (s) of the members through 
any  type  of  electronic  mode  like  video  conferencing  etc.  and  the  members  so  participating 
shall be deemed to be present in such General Meeting (s) for the purpose of the quorum, 
voting,  recording  and  all  other  relevant  provisions  in  this  regard.  Preference  shareholders 
shall have right to vote in accordance with the provisions of Section 47 of the Act. 

90.  Chairman,  if  any,  of  the  Board  of  Directors  shall  preside  as  Chairman  at  every  General 
Meeting of the Company. If there is no such Chairman or if at any Meeting he is not present 
within fifteen minutes after the time appointed for holding the meeting or is unwilling to act as 
Chairman,  the  members  present  shall  choose  another  Director  as  Chairman,  and  if  no 
Director be present or if all the Directors decline to take the Chair, then the members present 
shall choose someone of their number to be Chairman. 

91. 

If a poll is duly demanded, it shall be taken in such manner as the Chairman directs and the 
results  of  the  poll  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  decision  of  the  meeting  on  the  resolution  in 
respect of which the poll was demanded. 

92. 

In the  case of equal  votes,  the  Chairman of the meeting  at which the  show  of hands  takes 
place or at which the poll is demanded shall be entitled to a second or a casting vote. 

93. 

 

 

18 

 

a) On a poll, every member holding equity shares therein shall have voting rights in proportion 
to his share of the paid-up Equity Share Capital. 

b)  On a poll, a member having more than one vote, or his proxy or other person entitled to 

vote for him need not use all his votes in the same way. 

94. 

In  the  case  of  joint  holders  the  vote  of  the  first  named  of  such  joint  holders  who  tenders  a 
vote  whether  in  person  or  by  proxy  shall  be  accepted  to  the  exclusion  of  the  votes  of  the 
other joint holders. 

95.  On a poll, votes may be given either personally or by proxy. 

96.  No  member  shall  be  entitled to vote at  any  General  Meeting  unless  all  calls  or  other  sums 
presently payable by  him have been paid, or in regard to which the Company has lien and 
has exercised any right of lien. 

ACCOUNTS 

97.  Books  of  accounts  shall  be  kept  at  the  registered office of  the  Company  and  at  such other 

place in India as the Directors may think fit. 

98.  The  Directors  shall,  from  time  to  time,  determine  whether  and  to  what  extent  and  at  what 
times  and  places  and  under  what  condition  or  regulation  the  accounts  and  books  of  the 
Company  or  any  of  them  shall  be  open  to  inspection  of  members  not  being  Directors,  No 
member (not being a Director) shall have any right to inspect the same, except as provided 
by the Act, or authorised by the Board of Directors, or by any resolution of the Company in 
General Meeting. 

AUDIT 

99. 

 Once  atleast  in  every  year  the  account  of  the  Company  shall  be  examined,  and  the 
correctness thereof and of the Balance  Sheet  and  Profit  and  Loss Account, ascertained 
by one or more Auditor or Auditors. 

100. As  regards  the  appointment  and  remuneration,  qualification  and  disqualification,  removal, 
powers,  rights  and  duties  of  Auditors,  the  Directors  and  the  Auditors  shall  have  regard  to 
Sections 139 and 140 of the Act. 

101. Every  account of the Company when audited and  approved by a General Meeting shall be 
conclusive, except so far as regards any error discovered therein before or at the audit of the 
then  next  account,  and  whenever  such  error  is  discovered  within  that  period  the  account 
shall be forthwith corrected and hence forth shall be conclusive. 

102. 1) 

 

The  Company  in  General  Meeting  may,  upon  the  recommendation  of  the 

Board resolve; 

CAPITALISATION OF PROFITS 

a)  That it is desirable to capitalise a part of the amount for the time being standing to the 

credit of the Profit and Loss Account, or otherwise available for distributions and 

b)  That such sum be accordingly set free for distribution in the manner specified in clause 
two among the members who would have been entitled thereto, if distributed by way of 
dividend and in the same proportions. 

2) 

The  sum  aforesaid  shall  not  be  paid  in  case,  but  shall  be  applied  to  the  provisions 
contained in clause three either in or towards; 

a)  Paying up any amounts for the time being unpaid on any shares held by such members 

respectively, 

b)  Paying  up  in  full,  unissued  shares  or  debentures  of  the  Company  to  be  allotted  and 
distributed,  credited  as  fully  paid  up  amongst  such  members  in  the  proportions 
aforesaid or 

c)  Partly in the way specified in sub-clause (a) and partly in sub-clause (b). 

 

19 

 

3) 

4) 

 A  share  premium  account  and  a  capital  redemption  reserve  account  may  for  the 
purpose  of  this  Articles  only  be  applied  in  paying  up  unissued  shares  to  be  issued  to  
the members of the Company as fully paid bonus shares. 

The  Board  shall  give effect  to  the  resolution  passed  by  the  Company  in pursuance of 
these Articles. 

COMMON SEAL 

103. The Directors, shall provide a Common Seal of the Company shall be kept in safe custody. 
The Board shall have powers from time to time, to destroy the seal and substitute a new seal 
in lieu thereof. 

104. Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Act  and  the  Companies  (Share  Capital  and  Debentures) 
Rules,  2014,  the  Common  Seal  of  the  Company  shall  be  affixed  to  any  instrument  with 
express  authority,  of a  resolution  passed  by  the  Board of  Directors,  for  affixing  the  seal,  in 
the  presence  of  at  least  one  of  the  Directors  along  with  either  the  Secretary  or  any  official 
duly  authorised  by  the  Board  of  Directors  and  that  Director  and  the  Secretary,  or  the 
Authorised Signatory shall sign every instrument to which the Common Seal is so affixed in 
their presence. 

INDEMNITY 

105. Every Director, Secretary or Officer, of the Company or any person (whether an officer of the 
Company or not) employed by the Company as Auditor shall be indemnified out of the funds 
of the Company against all liabilities incurred by him as such Director, Secretary or Officer or 
Auditor in defending a proceeding whether civil or criminal in which judgement is given in his 
favour or in which he is acquitted or in connection with any application u/s  463 of the Act in 
which relief is granted to him by the Court. 

106. No  Director,  Secretary,  Auditor  or  other  officer  of  the  Company  shall  be  liable  for  the  acts, 
receipts,  neglects,  defaults  of  any  other  Director,  Auditor  or  other  officer  for  joining  in  any 
receipts  or  other  acts  for  conformity  or  for  any  loss  or  expense happening  to the  Company 
through  the  insufficiency  of  title  to  any  property  acquired  by  order  of  the  Director  for  or  on 
behalf of the Company or for the insufficiency of deficiency of any security in or upon which 
any  of  his  moneys  of  the  Company  shall  be  vested  or  for  any  loss  or  damage  arising  from 
the bankruptcy, insolvency or tortious act of any person with whom any money, securities or 
effect shall be deposited, unless the same happens through his default or negligence. 

DIVIDENDS 

107. The Company in Annual General Meeting may declare a dividend to be paid to the members 
according to their rights and interests in the profits and for the purpose of the equilisation of 
dividends  any  sums  from  time  to  time  in  accordance  with  these  presents  carried  to  the 
reserve,  depreciation  or  other  special  funds,  may  be  applied  in  payment  thereof.  The 
dividends  so declared by  the  General  Body  shall  not  exceed the  amount  so recommended 
by the Directors. 

108. The Directors may, from time to time, pay to the Members such interim dividends as in their 

judgment the financial position of the Company justifies. 

109. Subject to the rights of persons, if any, entitled to shares with special rights as to dividends 
all dividends shall be declared and paid according to the amounts paid or credited as paid on 
the shares in respect where of the dividend is paid but if and so long as nothing is paid upon 
any  of  the  shares  in  the  Company,  dividends  may  be  declared  and  paid  according  to  the 
amounts of the shares. 

110. No dividends shall be payable except out of the profits of the year or any other undistributed 
profits,  and  no  large  dividend  shall  be  declared  than  is  necessary  recommended  by  the 
Directors of the Company. The Directors in Annual General Meeting may declare a smaller 
dividend.  Before declaring any dividend, the Company shall have regard to the provisions of 
Section  123  of  the  Act.  Unclaimed  dividend,  if  any,  will  be  dealt  as  per  the  provisions  of 
Section  125  of  the  Act  and  no  unclaimed  dividend  shall  be  forfeited  unless  in  accordance 
with law. 

 

20 

 

111. The Directors may retain any dividends on which the Company has a lien and may apply the 
same in  or  towards  satisfaction  of the  debts,  liabilities  or  engagements  in respect  of  which 
the lien exists, subject to section 125 of the Act. 

112. Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Insolvency  and  Bankruptcy  Code,  2016,  the  assets  of  the 
Company may on its winding up be distributed pro-rata among the members in specie or in 
kind. 

113. Whenever any differences or disputes arise between the Company on one hand and any of 
the members or either their heirs, executors, administrators, assignors on the other hand, or 
between  the  members  interest  touching  the  true  intent  or  construction  or  the  incidents  or 
consequences  of  these  presents  or  the  statutes  or  touching  anything  when  or  thereafter 
done,  executed,  omitted,  re  suffered  in  pursuance  of  these  presents  or  of  the  statutes  or 
touching  any  breach,  or  otherwise  relating  to  the  promises  or  to  these  presents  or  to  any 
statute affecting the Company or to any of the officers of the Company every such difference 
of  disputes  shall  be  referred  to  the  decision  of  two  arbitrators  of  whom  one  shall  be 
appointed  by  each  of  the  parties  to  the  dispute  or  difference.  Such  arbitration  will  be 
governed by the laws for the time being in force. 

114. No members shall be entitled to inspect the Company's books without the permission of the 
Directors to require discovery of or any information respecting any details of the company's 
trading  or  any  matter  which  may  be  in  the  nature  of  a  trade  secret,  or  a  secret  process  or 
trade  mystery  which  is  or  may  relate  to  the  conduct  of  the  business  of  the  Company  and 
which in the opinion of the Directors, it will not be expedient in the interests of the members 
of the Company to communicate to the public. 

115. To  officers  and  authorised  nominees  of  any  financial  institutions  giving  loan  or  any  other 
form of financial assistance shall have a right to inspect the Factory, Documents, Registers, 
Books  of  accounts  and  other  relevant  statutory  books  and  obtain  copies  and  extracts  from 
them during the normal working hours of the Company. 

WINDING UP 

116.  If  the  Company  shall  be  wound  up,  the  liquidator  may,  with  the  sanction  of  a  special 
resolution  of the  Company  and  any  other  sanction  required  by  the  Act, divide  amongst  the 
members,  in  special  or  kind,  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  assets  of  the  Company,  whether 
they shall consist of property of the some kind or not. 

For  the  purpose  aforesaid,  the  liquidator  may  set  such  values  as  he  deems  fair  upon  any 
property to be divided as aforesaid and may determine how such division shall be carried out 
as between the members or different classes of members. 

The  liquidator  may,  with  the  like  sanction,  vest  the  whole  or  any  part  of  such  assets  in 
trustees  upon  such  trusts  for  the  benefit  of  the  contributries  as  the  liquidator,  with  the  like 
sanction,  shall  think  fit  but  so  that  no  member  shall  be  compelled  to  accept  any  shares  or 
other securities whereon there is any liability. 

INSPECTION OF BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS AND REGISTERS 

117. Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Board shall from time to time determine whether and 
to what times and places and under what conditions or regulations the accounts, books and 
documents of the Company or any of them shall be open to the inspection  of the members 
and  no  member  (not  being  a  Director)  shall  have  any  right  of  inspecting  any  account  or 
books  or  documents  of  the  Company  except  as  conferred  by  statute  or  authorised  by  the 
Directors or by resolution of the Company in the General Meeting. 

118. Subject to the provisions of these Articles and the Act, no member shall be entitled to enter 
the property of the Company or to inspect or examine the Company's premises or properties 
of  the  Company  without  the  permission  of  the  Directors  or  to  require  discovery  of  or  any 
information respecting any details of the company's trading or any matter which is or may be 
in  the  nature  of  a  trade  secret,  mystery  of  trade,  or  secret  process  or  of  any  matter 
whatsoever which may relate to the conduct of the business of the Company and which in 

 

the opinion of the directors it will be expedient in the interests of the Company to 
communicate. 

SECRECY 

119. Every  Director,  Secretary,  Auditor,  or  any  other  person  employed  in  the  business  of  the 
Company  shall,  if  so  required  by  the  Board,  before  entering  upon  his  duties,  sign  a 
declaration  pledging  himself  to  observe  a  strict  secrecy  respecting  all  transactions  of  the 
Company  with  the  customers  and  the  state  of  accounts  with  the  individuals  and  in  matters 
relating thereto and shall by such declaration pledge himself not to reveal any of the matters 
which may come to his knowledge in the discharge of his duties except when required to do 
so by the Board or by the law of the Country and except so far as may be necessary in order 
to comply with any of the provisions in these Articles contained. 

120. Subject to the  Act and these Articles, no member or  any other person (other than Director) 
shall  be  entitled  to  enter  the  premises  of  the  Company  or  to  inspect  or  examine  the 
Company's  premises  or  properties  or  the  books  of  accounts  of  the  Company  without  the 
permission  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Company  for  the  time  being  or  to  require 
discovery of or any information respecting any details of the company's trading or any matter 
which is or may be in the nature of a trade secret, mystery of trade, or secret process or of 
any matter which may relate to the conduct of the business of the Company and which in the 
opinion  of  the  Board  will  be  expedient  in  the  interests  of  the  Company  to  disclose  or 
communicate. 

BUYBACK OF SHARES/SECURITIES 

121. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Articles of Association, the Company shall have 
the  power  to  buyback  its  shares  or  other  securities  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
Section  68  of  the  Act  from  its  existing  shareholders  or  the  holders  of  other  securities  on  a 
proportionate basis or by purchase of the shares or securities issued to the employees of the 
Company pursuant to a scheme of stock options or sweat equity. 

21 

 

 

s 
No. 

Name,  Address,    Description 
and  Occupation 
each 
subscriber 

of 

Signature of 
Subscribers 

Signature, 
Name, 
Address.  Description  and 
Occupation of Witness 

 

 

 
 

 

1. 

2. 

 

3. 

SHIVNADAR 
S/o Late Sh.5.S.Nadar, 
44, Friends Colony, 
New Delhi-110 065 
(Business) 

RAJENDRA SINGH PAWAR 
5/o Col. Kanwal Singh 
M-190, 
Greater Kailash-II 
New Delhi-110 048 
(Business) 

VIJAY KUMAR THADANI 
S/o Late Sh. H.B.Thadani 
S-223, Greater Kailash, 
New Delhi-110 048 
(Service) 

 

 
 

 
 

Sd/- 
S S Nadar 

Sd/- 
Rajendra  Singh 
Pawar 

I witness the signatures of 

all the Subscribers who 
have subscribed in my 

presence 

At New Delhi 

S/d    

(A.K.Sood) 

S/o Late Sh. V.P.Sood 

P-48, South Extension-II 

New Delhi-110 049 

(Chartered Accountant) M.No. 
14372 

Sd/- 
Vijay Kumar 
Thadani 

New Delhi  Dated : 28th day of April 1992 

25 

 

 

 
 
 

 

